You are listening to radiolab radio that
from w n y.
S e n n p. R.
Three two one. Hey there. I'm Robert Krulwich. Jad is on paternity leave.
This is Radiolab, the podcast,
and today I thought I'd introduce you to a particular guy on a particular day in
Manchester, England. It's 1952 an Alan Turing, a math professor,
discovers that a number of things have disappeared from his home. Look,
kind of like a Berkeley. He was missing a shirt, a pair of shoes,
an old pair of pants, maybe a compass. It was stuff.
It was just household stuff. Nothing of any value.
That's Jan 11 and David Levin.
Both of them have written books about Alan Turing,
and so being very literal minded, he thought, well,
what do you do when you're robbed? You called the police,
so the police come to his house. The detectives,
he has this conversation and they say, you know, he's kind of a curious chap.
They let him talk and they're like, it's a real shame.
We're going to have to arrest him. Tearing.
Okay,
why would they have to?
They're just telling me just these effectively implicated himself in terms of
here's what happened. The belief set, tearing down, said, Oh,
who do you think made off at those things of yours? And he says to them,
he suspected the thief was an acquaintance of his boyfriend,
his boyfriend. Yes. Yes. She has a time.
There was a law in England
which criminalized quote unquote acts of gross indecency between adult man in
public or private.
So we told the cops that he was having sex with a guy who was like,
why do we doesn't exactly say we're having sex? But he, um,
says enough that it's clear he was never ashamed of being gay.
This is just not something, again, that he understood what the fuss was about.
And what happened was he, was he convicted? Yeah, he's convicted and he's,
what's his sentence? Estrogen pills and um, implants. Mr Janie implants.
Oh my God. Yeah. Chemical Castration.
And when I learned this,
I wondered if those policemen had any idea that the guy they were arresting was
first of all,
one of the great minds of the 20th century or war hero who single handedly,
almost by himself shortened World War II by at least two years.
And the questions he posed way back then, I still,
I think the most provocative ideas I know, but we're getting ahead of ourselves.
So let me back up to when he was a schoolboy around 15 or 16 in England,
he gets to Sherbourne school, which is the, uh, public school,
as they say in England. I guess we would call it a boarding school,
boarding school for boys. Where, um, what did he look like? He had dark hair,
very dark hair, sort of square face. He, he wasn't unattractive.
He was just so goofy. So did the other kids make fun of him at school or,
or did he, I mean, he's teased, bullied,
but he's not completely unhappy.
He falls in love with another student named Christopher Moore.
Com is very charming, socially smooth, handsome.
They have this bond of a science. It's an unrequited love.
Did he express his love to this other kid or, I think it was pretty obvious.
He was always sort of there sitting next to Chris Marcom,
every class right behind him right next to him. And I think, um,
at some point Chris commented that, you know,
maybe it's a little too much attention. Um,
but I don't think he really made a formal declaration of his love.
But he did maintain a relationship with Chris's mother. Um,
even after Chris died,
[inaudible]
Chris Morgan died while he was still in school of, um, Bavarian tuberculosis,
um, and had kept his illness a secret. Just one day.
It was just this announcement. He was dead.
So I think it came as a complete shock to Allen.
His memory really lingered and I think that, uh,
how do we know that a kid had a boy crush in school?
Their letters most moving are the letters that he wrote after more comes death.
We actually went out and found a few of them.
And here's one that he wrote to his mother. He says,
I feel sure that I should meet mark them again somewhere.
And there will be some work for us to do together as I believe there was for us
to do here now that I'm left to do you want it to believe it.
Christmas spirit lived on and, and he was sort of awkwardly trying on these um,
ideas that he had inherited from his religious upbringing and,
and you can see this in the letters to try and begins to lose his faith
[inaudible]
and eventually comes to the sort of brutal conclusion that when Chris was gone,
he was gone.
The only love he had left at that point was mathematics.
So he goes off to kings college, Cambridge to study math. Yeah, exactly.
He was still kind of a loner. If you look at photographs of touring,
I think I'm always struck by the fact that he looks like he's not actually
there. He looks like he's like a lot of mathematicians. He,
he lives simultaneously in two different worlds. The,
the world that the rest of us live in any world lived in a kind of extraordinary
world of, of abstraction.
No lying in the fields and Cambridge,
just him and his thoughts staring up at the sky or was that just didn't do that.
He would literally go and lie in the meadow and he would have these Epiphanes,
these realizations
and one day he's lying in Grandchester meadows that's near the campus and he's
thinking over a pretty tough problem.
Is there a quick automatic way to prove or disprove a mathematical proposition?
And this was a big question in math at the time, the ins and outs of,
we're trying to all that important to us what's important is that it led to Alan
Turing's idea for of all things the machine, the machine doesn't exist.
The machine is never built. It is never meant to be built.
This is James Glick as science writer who has studied touring.
It's the world's most impractical machine, but it's very simple.
These were the elements of the machine, number one piece of tape,
infinitely long.
So therefore it's already never going to exist because we can't have infinitely
long pieces of tape. And number two,
something that reads rights ones and Zeros
on the tape device. And number three, a set of instructions.
So if you've got as zero,
then you go to the left and you write a one.
Or if you've got a one go to the left and you write another one or you you,
yeah, and you've got to remember where you've been.
So you have a certain amount of memory, but that's it.
And then he proved that the machine could do anything.
You could add a course and then you could subtract and multiply.
You could also do a little calculus, actually a lot of calculus.
You could do trig and mathematical proofs and sophisticated mathematical proofs.
Anything that could be done in mathematics mechanically could be done by his
imaginary idiot. Simple machine. Is this such a big idea?
I mean,
all you're saying really is he figured out how to put logic or actually had a
program and machine. Okay. But, but no, Robert,
you're already cheating because as soon as you say you're going to give them
machine some logic. Yeah. And then as soon as you used to work program,
you're using very modern bits of knowledge that we've all internalized.
But the idea of putting logic into a machine,
no one thought of that. That's just weird machines at that time.
Bear in mind, we're generally single fund.
The idea that you do your email on your computer and Photoshop,
you know you don't buy a different machine. That is ingenious.
That traces back to touring's original idea that I can build an
electromechanical brain and I can teach it how to do different things.
This was the dawn of the computer age. Computer used to mean a person,
usually a woman who would sit and do mathematics and now we've got this guy who
saying that with a simple formula, tape code and a set of instructions.
We can give human liabilities to a machine and not just the abilities of our
hands, but the nimble ability of our beautiful brains. It's a beautiful,
magical, simple idea.
Turns machine is say as Hans watercolors,
it's it's box prelude.
He was a lonely 22 year old just thinking and he invented a thing that lives in
the mind of every computer scientist today.
He didn't realize that just a few years later he was going to be applying these
same skills to winning the war for, for England.
The Battle of London, which began with strong fast is a Nazi.
Obama's attacking the Capitol at night led to a big fire on the water side.
It's 1940 and the German high command is sending secret messages written in Code
to naval commanders to u boat captain saying,
I'd sink that ship mind this harbor.
The messages are encrypted in this crazy fangled encrypting thing that they
called the enigma machine, kind of a typewriter.
So they would type bomb that boat in German of course,
and the machine would swap the letters and turn the type into jibberish.
But they changed the settings every,
and what this meant was that it was considered by both the Germans and the
British to be uncrackable except Winston Churchill thought, Al, let me try.
So in total secrecy,
British intelligence brought together the most talented amateur decoders that
they could find. They chose Mathematicians, champions,
people who could solve the Sunday Times crossword puzzle extremely fast.
And they were all instructed to go to a set of buildings halfway between Oxford
and Cambridge. It was a place called Bletchley Park,
but the architect of the effort was really Alan Turing who was an odd kind of
Joyce because in many ways he was a very strange man. He was kind of paranoid.
I think there was clear,
I mean he had this system where his bicycle chain came off every certain number
of revolutions and uh,
he knew how many revolutions he was able to ride before the chain would come
off. And it was, I think in order to stop other people from riding his bicycle.
But he was the one who again,
had a very typically tyring ish sort of breakthrough. He thought, well,
this code is generated by a machine,
therefore a machine can be built that will be able to break the code.
So he built this machine that was called the bomb and it was a [inaudible].
It was huge. It was the size of, of I, of a wall.
And it could try out all kinds of different solutions to this breaking the code
problem and tiering decided to focus this machine on one little Achilles' heel
that he found in the code itself. At the beginning of a typical message,
a German would get on the machine and he'd have sort of habitual openings,
you know, phrases that were very,
very commonly used and the Germans were fairly unimaginative,
unimaginative at the start, like, you know,
hi HIPAA or good morning or something.
Exactly how Hitler or the weather so high would be h. E. I. L.
They use your in.
Then they realized that they could actually crack the code because of this.
I would say Mr People. Hell, the end of the war in Europe.
When English realized that Alan Turing and his team had broken the code,
did that make Allen turning into a superstar? I mean,
did he get the greetings from the Queen? Not at all,
because it was all top secret. What does that mean?
That King George didn't know volunteering or Winston Churchill didn't know.
Central certainly knew.
Churchill definitely took a particular interest in sharing and trains
transmissions. Oh, he did? Sure. Oh no, he's a war hero.
There's no question about that.
His contribution is of crucial importance in terms of turning the tide of the
war in favor of the allies. And yet, as far as I'm aware,
a Turing was never thanked or acknowledged for what he did.
If I were King George, I would like to sent him a little, um, and he didn't.
Having defeated the enigma machine touring now goes back to his first love.
The touring machine.
Mathematicians all over the world are now building computers and big risks.
Frigerators highs contraptions. Actually,
there was one at Manchester University where touring took a teaching job and the
one there more than just math and the machine do all sorts of things.
I believe it could sing. I'm pretty sure he could sing. Um,
God saved the king.
Not very well. This is what it actually sounded like.
It's not something you'd really want a much too.
It was not the machine. The uttering ideally would have liked to build.
Touring had a bigger idea at this point, the idea of the thinking machine.
He really invented the field of artificial intelligence and was the first person
to hypothesize about whether a machine could actually be said to think and not
just think that touring,
but maybe flirt with you a little bit or joke with you to have a ascension's
insight in electronic manufactured mind. And when people said,
how would you know that mine was truly sentient? He said, just ask it,
just ask it. Uh, can truly [inaudible]
well, it's not going to be ever that easy. But Turing did come up with a test.
It's a way to test whether a machine is doing something like thinking like human
thinking, what we now call the touring test.
We've described it on our show before, how we'll know this is from, um,
from the show. We called the talking to machine yet a person,
sit him down at a computer, have them start a conversation in texts. Hi,
how are you? Inter good. Pops up on the screen, sort of like Internet chat. Yep.
So after that first conversation, have them do it again. And then again,
you know, hi, hello, how are you? Et Cetera, back and forth.
But here's the catch. Half of these conversations will be with real people.
Half will be with these computer programs that are basically impersonating
people.
If you can put this thing behind a curtain and you talk to it and it convinces
you that it's intelligent and, and alive and sentient than it is,
what's the big fuss? But there was a big fuss. Um,
one second. A neuroscientist at the time,
Sir Jeffrey Jefferson turned attorneys. It, how dare you.
No machine will ever think like a human right? Because no machine can feel it.
We do it in all the ways we do pleasure at its success.
Grief when its valves fuse, be warmed by flattery,
be made miserable by its mistakes. Be charmed by sex.
Be angry or miserable when it cannot get what it wants. Huh?
And Turing's response to that was, well,
I can say the same thing to you. You know, I can say to you, Robert,
I don't know what's going on inside your brain.
You tell me what you're feeling and what you're experiencing,
but how do I know that? What your,
how do any of us know that any other human being is a human being?
Touring is really one of the first to say.
He's the first to say it's not just that I want to build a machine that can
think it's that we are machines that think we are nothing more than flesh blood
neurons. We are just machines ourselves.
Just soulless biological machines. And this isn't a dark moment for him.
It's a moment of acceptance. Says Jana this time it's not about
math or science, it's about something bigger.
It's about the nature of the universe and our place in it.
And according to David,
not only did touring feel like himself as kind of a machine,
he felt a kinship with all the thinking machines that would ever be manufactured
in the future. All those mechanical minds,
he felt he had something in common with them
for touring the machines who are more likely to be victims,
victims of prejudice,
victims of injustice vis victims of people like Jefferson.
Jefferson is saying to the machines, you don't think,
because I say you don't think, and you know,
England was saying to touring,
you can't be what you are and we're going to change you.
Which brings us back to where we started this show.
It is now 1952.
Alan Turing has been convicted of gross indecency, a crime punishable by,
as we told you,
a jail term or the court can order you to take a hormone injections.
And he was given a choice.
He could go to prison or he could be quote unquote cured.
And the cure consisted of massive doses of estrogen.
Nobody importance went and said to the judge, here's a character reference.
By the way, this guy won the world war that we just fought art.
Well,
I suppose you could say that they were cutting him a break by not sending into
prison by giving him this horrific,
horrific alternative. What were the hormones supposed to do?
It was the crudest kind of pseudoscience.
There was some clap trap theory that homosexuality could be cured through
injections of estrogen. Uh,
what it really did was it made him, uh,
impotent and profoundly depressed.
He grows breasts. Um,
it certainly doesn't work to represses homosexuality.
He's still vocally gay,
but he's also worried that because he's now famously gay,
his court case being in the papers and all that,
everybody from now on will dismiss his ideas. Writing once to a friend.
He said,
I'm a rather afraid that the falling cylinders and may be used by some in the
future. Touring believes machines think touring lies with men.
Therefore, machines do not think it is signed.
Yours in distress, Allen,
the hormone treatments ended. He kept working, but his mood darkened.
Turing's favorite film was Snow White and the seven doors and he particularly
loved the scene where the witch dips the apple in the brew and she chants dip
the apple in the brew, let the sleeping death seep through.
One night in 1954 it was June 8th,
he was at home and at some point during that night he calls himself how he laces
and apple with cyanide and he bites from the poison apple
[inaudible].
He left
no note.
55 years later, in 2009 the prime minister of Great Britain,
Gordon Brown,
issued a formal apology to Alan Turing and in 2011 coming up on his hundredth
birthday,
23,000 people sent a petition to the British government asking that Alan Turing
be given a posthumous pardon for the so-called crime of moral turpitude.
In 2012 a government minister, Lord Tom McNally said, no,
that we will not do. Here's the statement.
A posthumous pardon was not considered appropriate as Alan Turing was properly
convicted of what was at the time a criminal offense.
He would have known that his offense was against the law and that he would be
prosecuted.
It's an amazing life and I'm in awe that anybody could have accomplished quite
as much as he did and suffered as much as he did.
It's almost overwhelming, but when I think about it,
here's a piece of what Alan Turing thought up that just hurts a little,
at least me,
this idea that machines can one day become in effect,
our equivalent.
This is still such a powerful and emotional question for us to deal with.
And I guess we're still divided between people who think that would be kind of a
cool thing and people who think that'd be a horrible thing. And um,
the people who think it would be a horrible thing.
I guess I was feel that way partly because it makes us feel kind of bad about
ourselves. You know, we, because we aren't, we aren't,
there's nothing magical about us if we're just machines
falling on one side of these lines. Are you saying, well,
I think what I'm willing to say is I think we're just machines and I think we're
just made of matter.
I'm sorry to be giving religious opinions here because these are religious
opinions, but for me,
that doesn't make me feel that we're any less special at mics.
I think what a wonderful thing that a collection of matter created by a process
of evolution that lasted billions of years.
How wonderful that this process and that these little collections of matter are
able to produce saisons watercolors and box preludes.
Uh, I can live with that.
Could you,
if I built you a computer that could create equally beautiful watercolors
and equally beautiful musical compositions,
would you feel happier or diminish?
I mean, I think in a way you're asking if you see how the trick is done,
does it then vanish? Does it just become a trick?
The trick being a great painting or a great piece of music?
Um,
I feel the art I love is always art that I don't fully understand.
There's some mystery there always.
I don't quite fathom it now.
So if the computer is churning out a bunch of notes and you know exactly what
the rules are that the computer is following and there's no mystery,
how can that possibly be a great piece of music?
And the answer is we don't know how the computer is going to do it.
We don't know how the machine is going to do it.
And when the machine produces music that is as lovely as the music that you and
I love,
I believe it will still be unfathomable.
[inaudible]
James Glick is the author of the information.
It's a book about information theory in artificial intelligence.
David Levitt has a book called the man who knew too much.
It's a biography of Alan Turing,
and Jan 11 has a novel about turning and Kurt Goodell, another mathematician.
She calls her novel, and it's, it's quite something to actually,
so it's kind of odd, but anyway, it's called a mad man.
Dreams of turning machines. Jad we'll be back soon.
I'm Robert Krulwich. This is Radiolab.